Israel has allowed trucks carrying fuel
into Gaza as fears grow of spreading
starvation and disease in the territory
Israel agreed to allow two trucks of
fuel per day into Gaza after pressure
from the United States and dire warnings
from the United Nations about the
humanitarian situation in the territory
the UN says the fuel deliveries are less
than 10% of what's required for basic
life preserving
measures many civilians in Gaza are
struggling to find enough food food and
water to survive with fuel desperately
needed to power generators at bakeries
and water desalination plants I'd like
to now welcome Martin Frick German
director of the UN world food program uh
first of all Martin we in the media have
been reporting for weeks now that an
already dire situation is getting worse
by the day tell us what you're hearing
from your un colleagues in
Gaza well I can absolutely confirm the
humanit Arian situation in Gaza is
disastrous we are running out of
everything particularly fuel as we have
just heard now there was a first
shipment of fuel which is a drop in the
ocean really because it's less than 10%
of what we actually would need a day
just for life saving
measures the Gaza Strip is home of
course to over 2 million people and now
it's a war zone thousands have been
killed tens of thousands injured
what's left of the food distribution
infrastructure you can basically say
that the local market collapsed
everything that can be consumed without
being cooked everything canned is
basically run out bottled water is not
available the water sources that do
exist the wells are often contaminated
and present a health risk so with the
onset of winter on top of that we are
really afraid of starvation in
Gaza of course we understand that fuel
is finally getting through you
referenced that earlier but I take it
that you don't see this as all good
news Well fuel is desperately needed
fuel is behind everything it's behind
the desalination of seawat which is
essential for the water supply it's
essential for pumping sewage which is
you know vital for hygiene and for um
Health Public Health but it's also vital
for bakeries for example for Mills we
still have about 9,000 tons of wheat in
Gaza but we can't use it because you
can't Mill it and even if you can Mill
it you would need water and energy to
bake bread we used to work together with
23 bakeries in gasa not a single one is
operational anyone and bread of course
is the most basic of all stable Foods
you said that the fuel that's going to
be getting into Gaza is a drop in the
ocean how is it that Aid agencies such
as the agency that you're working with
can can can can bring more pressure to
the Israeli government to get the kind
of fuel that is essential for your
operations well it's slowly starting we
now have an agreement to bring in two
trucks a day two trucks of diesel which
already helps and it's desperately
needed particular for the hospitals and
for food supply um we could run for a
bit of time as we have strategic
reserves but by 15th of November our
partner organization unra has basically
announced that without fuel they have to
stop every bit of humanitarian Aid
inside
Gaza that is uh Martin Frick uh German
director of the UN world food program
many many
thanks thank
you and we can now speak to Marina Miron
she is a military Analyst at King's
College in London uh Marina in the last
few hours hundreds of people have
reportedly evacuated gaza's largest
hospital the alifa medical complex it's
a bit unclear now if the Israeli Army
actually ordered an evacuation but why
would Israel want people out of there
especially when for for some patients
moving basically means
dying
good day Nick well that's a good
question but we have to see it from a
military perspective and from a military
perspective it is an obstruction to the
military operation to coming the
hospital because there is always a
danger that a civilian might be caught
in crossfire so in order to increase the
speed of the operation we know that the
IDF has been coming the buildings of the
hospital very slowly also because of the
presence of of civilians of patients in
the hospital it would make the military
operation easier and of course we have
heard the report that the hospital
doesn't have um any electricity to
operate any of its equipment so in the
long term it might be more beneficial to
evacuate the patients as far as possible
in order for them to get proper
treatment and increase a chances of
survival and just to get to why the Army
is there for weeks the Israeli Defense
Force have claimed there was an
underground Hamas Command Center under
Hospitals now that they have taken over
this Hospital's grounds how convinced
are you by the evidence they've
provided well I'm afraid it's not me who
has to be convinced um I think Israel
has created a lot of expectations on
what we might be seeing in alifa
hospital and the problem is that the IDF
has not come through the entire complex
so so right now what is happening is
that the evidence that the IDF has
presented might not be considered as
sufficient in order to justify idf's
operation in the hospital because um
there is a difficult legal situation
here the IDF has to demonstrate indeed
that Hamas is using this hospital to
conduct their operations and that that
said they have to demonstrate clearly
that they are command head headquarters
of Hamas in this Hospital which would
then allow Israel to operate on its
territory because otherwise this
hospital is protected by the
international humanitarian law however
the expectation of what we're to see uh
what kind of command and control center
the Hamas is not a regular army so you
are not going to encounter a room full
of computers therefore um it is possible
that Israel will not be able to come up
with sufficient evidence in order to
support this claim which will Mak the
situation even more difficult for Israel
and if we could Marina just shift our
Focus to the other part of the conflict
the Israeli Army says his troops are
targeting areas wherever Hamas exists
including in southern Gaza how
complicated will it be to limit civilian
casualties if much of the gazin
population has actually fled
South it is very difficult indeed
because Hamas would um probably even if
they don't use humans um
as their Shields they might hide in
densely populated areas and then it will
come down to the decision of the
commanders on the ground whether to
Target those areas or not so the idea is
does the military Advantage outweighs
the potential collateral damage that
it's going to create such a strike is
going to create and that is a very
difficult decision which you have to
assess on a Case by case basis but it is
to be expected that there will be
collateral damage however the question
here is not whether there will be
collateral damage but how much there
will
be Marina [__] military Analyst at
King's College in London thank you so
much for those
insights thank you for having
me